---
title: Do I need to learn to sew?
date: Tue Jun 17 09:06:37 EDT 2014
subblog: muse
tags: 
---

Sometime in high school I learned how to look respectable. My resulting wardrobe came mostly from Old Navy. Summertimes were full of polo shirts and cargo shorts.

Now that it's been ten years since high school ended, I've grown a bit tired of that and found it difficult to shake the feeling that my dress is juvenile. What's more, my ambitions have grown slightly past just trying to say as little as possible. Maybe I could actually express my personality.

As a result, in the last month I have spent more time shopping for everyday clothing than in the last few years combined. Which is to say I've spent maybe four hours. In the process I've found some things that I like but mostly I've been dissatisfied with the whole model of buying clothing from major retailers. 

In short, it seems like for the prices I am expected to pay I should be able to have clothing custom-made. I could be wrong or crazy but it seems like:

- Fabric can't be very expensive.
- Retailers pay next to nothing for labor.

So what am I paying for?

<!-- MORE -->

- literally, a label
- design
- overhead, like storefronts and warehouses

I don't find a label itself to be very valuable, so I don't feel right paying much for that. Design is certainly worthwhile, but I work in a profession where lots of amazing people give away their designs for free, so what makes Calvin Klein think he is so special? And sure, I guess you'll always have to pay for some overhead.

My experience with food gives me further reason to be suspicious of this system. A relatively small amount of food in America is actually prepared by the same people who eat it, or even directly for those people. But I find it is exactly this food that opens the way to a nutritious and satisfying life. Someone competent at doing this does not 


