---
title: Puerto Rico Travelogue
date: Tue Jul  8 08:44:11 EDT 2014
subblog: nick
tags: travel
---

### Friday, June 20

Mom, Mark and I had a 7am departure from the airport. I elected to take the trolley to the regional rail in order to arrive around 5:30. I was in a hurry and so drove to the trolley stop and ended up getting $60 in parking tickets because of street cleaning. Oops. The Southwest flight attendants were of unusually good humor and we arrived without event around 1pm. At the airport we met Samantha and Jace.

We were immediately impressed by the heat, humidity, and intensity of sunlight. It seemed we pale northeasterners might wilt in the island heat, especially as we waited for Mark to unlose himself en route back to the airport with the rental car. However we would soon be acclimated to the weather and find it rather pleasant.

We considered meeting up with Uncle Paul and family in Old San Juan where they were staying until Sunday, but not having a map or a great idea where we were going, and our landlady being insistent about meeting us at our rental apartment in Luquillo, we continued on straight. "TU MUNDO ES LIBERTY" greeted us from a mountainside as we drove east on 66.

Our landlady Maritza was a character. A New York Puerto Rican, she spoke English so fast that some despaired of understanding her were she to use Spanish. She was also frank about herself, the culture of Puerto Ricans who have not lived in the States (effectively calling them lazy as a rule), and so forth. 

The apartment was in a neighborhood that was clearly once very upscale but was not so much now. On the one hand were the neighbors with their two Mercedes parked conspicuously by the road but safely behind a gate, and on the other were stray dogs, chickens, and many neighborhood folk who were clearly not upper class. The back wall of the apartment opened through French doors to a balcony that overlooked the ocean by no more than a hundred yards. Walking out of the bedroom to eternity lapping at our back wall became a surreal and delightful experience through the week.

For dinner we ventured to the Luquillo kioscos, a long strip of sixty or so shops and restaurants maybe a mile east of our place. We found ourselves at a Maritza-recommended restaurant, one Don Coqui, and were privileged to meet the hostess Diane. Another New York Puerto Rican, she was generous, made us feel at ease, and spoke fondly of her grandchildren. Puerto Rico clearly being a land of rum, I ordered my first piña colada as well as my first mofongo. While we waited for the food Mark took up a game of pool and the jukebox with who proved to be a southeast Pennsylvania native anthropology PhD student and his Japanese friend or companion. The man was studing religion in Puerto Rico, something about how African spirituality was manifest in Puerto Rican religious practice.

From there we went to the Amigo grocery store in San Juan. In the ten years since we were last in Puerto Rico it was apparently bought out by Walmart. Produce shows prominently where it comes from. Unfortunately as Diane warned us mangoes did not seem to yet be in season, even though they came from Puerto Rico.

Once home we discovered the wireless Internet worked passably except for my Apple products. I nevertheless was able to plug into the router via Ethernet. This having been quite enough for one day, we retired and were soon sleeping fast by the loud hum of the bedroom air conditioners.

### Saturday, June 21

We made breakfast in our little kitchen. The kitchen itself was not outfit well for serious cooking. There was no oven, and finding simple things like mixing bowls was a little difficult. Nevertheless the challenge was nothing Mom was not up to, and we enjoyed scrambled eggs and toast made with pan de agua. 

Afterwards we packed up and went to Luquillo Beach, just a mile or so farther down the coastline. You could see it from our apartment and hear it too, beacuse for most of the time loud music was playing near the water and the bass would make it all the way to our ears. The beach itself was dominated by locals. We all noticed how they seemed to have less stress about body image than mainland Americans, since all manner of human body was hanging comfortably out of swimsuits wherever we looked. 

The sand wasn't anything too special and you did seem to have to watch out for ants. The water, however, was wonderful. Cool, still, clear, and very salty, it was effortless to float in. The four of us without Mark actually held hands in a chain floating on our backs at one point. Floating there and seeing the sun through your eyelids felt something like a return to the womb. I enjoyed swimming for the first time since my auto accident last fall, fidning the water resistance good for my recovering joints.

At lunchtime we left our towels and beach things and made for the kioscos on foot. We observed more comfortable Puerto Rican bodies, some games in the sand, and some impressive coniferous trees. Eventually we got to a point where we would need to walk across a narrow row of cinderblocks over a small concrete structure over a pond, or walk around a long way. We decided to go the short way, and one or two of us found the big step across the middle of the bridge to be on the frightening side. Mom paused for a good while, frozen. I was last in line and too felt a pang of hesitation when it was my time, but Sam told me there was someone waiting behind me, I suddenly realized it was no big deal, and with the problem solved in my mind I went across without any further problem. On the way back we took the longer way.

There was some disagreement about our lunch location. All of the places seemed identical with the same fried Puerto Rican dishes like plantains or pasteles in the window. Samantha favored the first place we walked through since it was full of locals, but Mom and I did not want to be around the likes of a man who had been on a slot machine for far too long (there were slots in the restaurant). We ended up at a place called the Ceviche Hut, more unique than the other places but more expensive as well. Each of the couples split a dish while I actually ordered ceviche, which I found delightful.

We were not back in the water for long before our big incident of the day occurred. Mark remained on the shore while the rest of us swam more. He got up to buy some ice cream, leaving his wallet and mine in the cooler with our stuff. A group of youths next to us had been drinking all day and did not seem to be up to much good. Mark kept an eye on the wallets and saw one of them take the wallets and take off.

From my perspective in the water (under the shadow of misty El Yunque far in the distance) I said to Mom, "Hey, Mark is running really fast." I thought he must have found a game with some locals. Mom's guess was far more accurate. "I wonder if someone stole the wallets."

Give adrenaline and Mark some credit. Drunk or no, Mark had 40 years on the thief, but he caught him quickly. The kid evidently realized that Mark was going to catch and tackle him and was so afraid he just threw the wallets away. This after attempting to blend in with his friends who all tried to play dumb.

By the time first I then the rest of us arrived from the beach, Mark was sitting on the cooler confronted with 3 of the other drunken youths. They were obnoxious in their attempts at conciliation, trying to get Mark to offer a handshake. "You can't do bad in life. You got to do good in life. Jesus wouldn't approve of him or what you were doing today," he warned them sternly. 

With that we certainly were not going to stick around at the beach. We packed up. On our way out we came across beach patrollwomen. Mark told them about the incident and tried to go with them to find the men. This made a bit more of a spectacle than we already had on our hands. "I'm so sorry about this," one dear woman said to us as she passed. Nothing much came of the patrol, and we left.

Dinner that night was cheeseburgers at home. We were beginning to learn that Amigo was not the best place to spend our vacation. The lines were just slow moving and the drive was just a bit out of the way. Dinner at any rate was quite serviceable, and we discovered the kitchen was far better outfit for mixing drinks than it was for real food. Samantha and Jace and I followed the old adage ("When in rum [country], do as the rum [drinkers] do") and made delicious piña coladas which we sipped from tall coqui-printed glasses.

As night drew on we closed the French doors on the balcony, shutting ocean and mosquitos out and air conditioning in.

## Sunday, June 22

Prior to the trip I entertained the thought of finding a Puerto Rican church to go to. Once there I even looked up a Presbyterian church in nearby Rio Grande. Not sure how I would get there, I thought I could at least tag along with Mom and Mark to mass. As it played out, however, I simply slept too late to do any of that.

They evidently endured quite a long sermon of which Mark understood zero words. Returning after noon, Mom made French toast from the Puerto Rican bread, topped with mangoes that were not quite in season but still as good as you generally find in the Northeast. On this day we were to finally connect with the other two parties of our family who were visiting at the same time. Uncle Paul and his crew were reloacting from the San Juan leg of their trip to a condo rental in Rio Grande, while Aunt Lisa and Fred and Grandma and Grandpa were to arrive early that afternoon from Baltimore.

We hoped to go that afternoon to a lechonera in Guavate, central Puerto Rico. Lechón is the Puerto Rican way of preparing and spit roasting whole pigs. The pork is seasoned with adobo and incredibly tender. We thought we had to go on Sundays because of the mention of a New York Times travel article. But there were a lot of moving pieces. Aside from my grandparents' imminent arrival, I also hoped to meet with our closest and only remaining Puerto Rican relative living on the island, my grandmother's first cousin Mr. Enrique Coto. As it turned out, while Sunday is indeed the big day for Puerto Ricans to have such excursions, lechoneras are open seven days, my grandparents would not be in any shape to turn around and drive for two hours after arriving in Luquillo, and Ricky was already at the lechonera by noon. We shelved the plan for later in the week, hoping to make it a waystation on our way to my great grandmother's native Ponce.

Since that plan was shelved, the McAvoys and Irelands among us decided to try and visit the famous bioluminescent bay in nearby Fajardo. This is a small inlet where certain plankton thrive off of the roots of mangrove trees lining the banks, and when they are disturbed they glow. Mom and Samantha and I vividly remembered the Bay from our 2004 visit to the island. We remembered glowing as blue as Obi Wan Kenobi as we swam in the bay (now illegal, oops) and seeing the fish stream next to the boat like shooting stars below us. At that time we just found and independent boat owner for hire, but we struggled to find such an arrangement this time. Most tours were by kayak, which no one but Samantha was enthused by, and all seemed to be in the $50 per head range. So we thought we would head out for Fajardo and try and recapture the magic.

We did find a kmart in Fajardo where Samantha and Jace bought long pants for potential horseback riding later in the day or week. We also found people riding horses in the street. We found the ferry terminal where we could ship out to the nearby island of Culebra and its perfect beaches. We found construction, and a resort, and restaurants, and poor housing, and many speedbumps, and even a marina. We saw the beautiful picnic area along the water there near the Las Cabezas de San Juan reserve in which the Bay was found. But we did not find our boat captain in shining armor. Resigned to the information we previously found online, we returned home a bit worse for the wear.

For dinner we were to meet Mark at the kioscos. We could see the lots to the kioscos were jam packed. It seemed Sunday was indeed the day Puerto Ricans have outings. We parked a little ways away on a beach road and walked there, past many beach parties and more loud music. Our only constraint for dinner was the place needed to have a TV so that Mark could watch USA vs Portugal in the World Cup. I did not mind seeing the game myself. We ended up at an Italian-Puerto Rican place called Ossobucco.

At Ossobucco I learned that my faculties for judging books by their covers were not nearly so effective in Puerto Rico as they were back home. Judging by appearances, particularly the beat-up and hard-to-read menu, I did not think the food would be very good. But I was quite wrong. In my opinion this was the best restaurant meal of the trip. Mom and I shared arepas, something of a first for each of us and quite delicious. The tostones (fried sliced plantains) here were just what tostones ought to be, hot and salty, and just what they were not always at other places. My seafood paella came in a long plate that conjured images of Spanish sail ships and was remarkable. I topped it off with a memorably delicious and refreshing mojito. Others had the likes of mofongo and churrasco steak, while Mom outright ordered pasta. Sam drank straight from a coconut.

On the walk back to our car Sam saw a shooting star. Or was it Mom? The sky and the water were the same shade of grey-black, and whispy grey clouds complemented the sea breeze. That night we left the French doors open, the breeze persuading predatory insects to mostly leave us alone.

## Monday, June 23

Monday dawned with promise. At last all three parties of our family were in Puerto Rico and staying within a twenty minute drive of one another. Having settled into our apartment, the five of us looked forward to the extended family portion of the vacation beginning.

On the agenda for the day was a trip to El Yunque, the national rainforest in Puerto Rico. Looking at a map, El Yunque takes up less of the island than I imagined, mostly localized to the northeast corner we were familiar with, from which it is quite visible as the rising deep green country just inland from the highway.

Uncle Paul and his family were game for a trip to the rainforest, so the four of us (no Mark) drove out to meet them. We transitioned rather abruptly from the highway to back roads of Rio Grande to empty country winding upwards to the rainforest. Upon arriving a comedy of errors ensued. Accustomed as we all were to life with cell phones, we made no precise plans about time or place for meeting, but unsurprisingly service was spotty at best up in El Yunque. The four of us shelled out the $4 per head to go to the rainforest visitor's center, but Uncle Paul went onward into the forest. We went to park in a lot by a waterfall to meet him. It took about fifteen minutes just to park there, and it was the wrong lot, and then Samantha and Jace wanted to take pictures by the waterfall, but Uncle Paul wasn't there, and none of our phones had any signal, so he and his family sat up there waiting until he took matters into his own hands and started jogging down the mountain to find us.

Finally we were reunited, and the next thing we knew we were at a sort of rest stop halfway up the mountain. They also had food, which several of us could not resist, but the food was on Puerto Rico time and we we sat there for an hour and a half. By then the interests of the two parties diverged. We wanted to hike to a waterfall we remembered visiting in 2004, but Uncle Paul's car was looking more for a drive-by experience. So with a hug and a shrug we parted and the four of us began our descent into the forest.

I'm really glad that Mom and Sam and Jace were prepared for rain, because I brought nothing of the sort. Jace preferred getting wet to wearing his rain jacket, so I happily took it when the rains started falling and then pouring.
