---
title: Puerto Rico Travelogue: Sunday, June 22
date: Sat Jul 12 17:15:29 EDT 2014
subblog: nick
tags: travel
---

Prior to the trip I entertained the thought of finding a Puerto Rican church to go to. Once there I even looked up a Presbyterian church in nearby Rio Grande. Not sure how I would get there, I thought I could at least tag along with Mom and Mark to mass. As it played out, however, I simply slept too late to do any of that.

They evidently endured quite a long sermon of which Mark understood zero words. Returning after noon, Mom made French toast from the Puerto Rican bread, topped with mangoes that were not quite in season but still as good as you generally find in the Northeast. On this day we were to finally connect with the other two parties of our family who were visiting at the same time. Uncle Paul and his crew were reloacting from the San Juan leg of their trip to a condo rental in Rio Grande, while Aunt Lisa and Fred and Grandma and Grandpa were to arrive early that afternoon from Baltimore.

<!-- MORE -->

We hoped to go that afternoon to a lechonera in Guavate, central Puerto Rico. Lechón is the Puerto Rican way of preparing and spit roasting whole pigs. The pork is seasoned with adobo and incredibly tender. We thought we had to go on Sundays because of the mention of a New York Times travel article. But there were a lot of moving pieces. Aside from my grandparents' imminent arrival, I also hoped to meet with our closest and only remaining Puerto Rican relative living on the island, my grandmother's first cousin Mr. Enrique Coto. As it turned out, while Sunday is indeed the big day for Puerto Ricans to have such excursions, lechoneras are open seven days, my grandparents would not be in any shape to turn around and drive for two hours after arriving in Luquillo, and Ricky was already at the lechonera by noon. We shelved the plan for later in the week, hoping to make it a waystation on our way to my great grandmother's native Ponce.

Since that plan was shelved, the McAvoys and Irelands among us decided to try and visit the famous bioluminescent bay in nearby Fajardo. This is a small inlet where certain plankton thrive off of the roots of mangrove trees lining the banks, and when they are disturbed they glow. Mom and Samantha and I vividly remembered the Bay from our 2004 visit to the island. We remembered glowing as blue as Obi Wan Kenobi as we swam in the bay (now illegal, oops) and seeing the fish stream next to the boat like shooting stars below us. At that time we just found and independent boat owner for hire, but we struggled to find such an arrangement this time. Most tours were by kayak, which no one but Samantha was enthused by, and all seemed to be in the $50 per head range. So we thought we would head out for Fajardo and try and recapture the magic.

We did find a kmart in Fajardo where Samantha and Jace bought long pants for potential horseback riding later in the day or week. We also found people riding horses in the street. We found the ferry terminal where we could ship out to the nearby island of Culebra and its perfect beaches. We found construction, and a resort, and restaurants, and poor housing, and many speedbumps, and even a marina. We saw the beautiful picnic area along the water there near the Las Cabezas de San Juan reserve in which the Bay was found. But we did not find our boat captain in shining armor. Resigned to the information we previously found online, we returned home a bit worse for the wear.

For dinner we were to meet Mark at the kioscos. We could see the lots to the kioscos were jam packed. It seemed Sunday was indeed the day Puerto Ricans have outings. We parked a little ways away on a beach road and walked there, past many beach parties and more loud music. Our only constraint for dinner was the place needed to have a TV so that Mark could watch USA vs Portugal in the World Cup. I did not mind seeing the game myself. We ended up at an Italian-Puerto Rican place called Ossobucco.

At Ossobucco I learned that my faculties for judging books by their covers were not nearly so effective in Puerto Rico as they were back home. Judging by appearances, particularly the beat-up and hard-to-read menu, I did not think the food would be very good. But I was quite wrong. In my opinion this was the best restaurant meal of the trip. Mom and I shared arepas, something of a first for each of us and quite delicious. The tostones (fried sliced plantains) here were just what tostones ought to be, hot and salty, and just what they were not always at other places. My seafood paella came in a long plate that conjured images of Spanish sail ships and was remarkable. I topped it off with a memorably delicious and refreshing mojito. Others had the likes of mofongo and churrasco steak, while Mom outright ordered pasta. Sam drank straight from a coconut.

On the walk back to our car Sam saw a shooting star. Or was it Mom? The sky and the water were the same shade of grey-black, and whispy grey clouds complemented the sea breeze. That night we left the French doors open, the breeze persuading predatory insects to mostly leave us alone.
