---
title: Coffee
date: Sat Jan 25 16:36:57 EST 2014
subblog: food
tags: particular foods
---

This is the first in what I intend to be a series of posts about particular foods.

Like alcohol, I came late to the party when it comes to coffee. Like alcohol, this was a result of a long-standing aversion to anything mind-altering as well as a reaction to the perceived abuses of my peers.

There seem to be few coffee drinkers who are not daily dependant on drinking coffee. That's not quite a condemnation in itself but it is at least a red flag. Growing up my parents each had a cup of Folgers Instant coffee in the morning and after dinner. My mom in particular quite depended on this. One day she stayed home sick from work with a horrific migraine, feeling like death huddled in a mound beneath her bedspread. Around noon she remembered she hadn't had coffee that morning and found her symptoms vanished shortly after she brewed a cup.

Then there was college. I slept so little in high school that by my sophomore year of college I was so burned out on not-sleeping that I resigned myself to doing whatever was necessary to get 8 hours per night. But few of my peers were converts to this gospel; they tended to use abundant coffee to fuel an unbalanced workaholic lifestyle. Naturally habits like this have persisted into the career realm for many of them.

So I have seen plenty of coffee dependence in my life, and I wanted no part of it for myself.

However, there was a sneaky little fact about coffee that also made me nervous.

<!-- MORE -->

I knew that while I didn't particularly like the taste of it, I could probably only have coffee about a half dozen times in my life before I would start liking it, cracking open the door to the dependence I feared. I don't think my goal was to prevent this descent from ever happening as it once had been with alcohol, but to control it so that I would land in a good time and place.

I was pretty much right. I remember distinctly several of the occasions when I inched closer to the great bean. There was the sip of my uncle's expresso at Maggiano's in 2003, the Restaurant Week lunch at Zahav with Alan Wong, and the Reanimator brew Gene Twilley brought to the first church men's breakfast he and I cooked together.

The tipping point came several months ago on a Sunday morning. I had stayed up late the night before carousing with Jon Kreamer in Washington D.C. and I was making my way back to Philadelphia to attend City Church. Arriving 45 minutes before the service started, I stopped at the coffee shop Lovers and Madmen for a quiche and a pourover. (Yes, like most things food-related, I vaulted straight into the ranks of the snob).  I wanted to be alert for the service and so I took the plunge.

The result was wonderful. I savored every sip of the delicious coffee as it restored the vitality I had just spent. All through church I was even more alert than on a normal rested day, my mind running all over the subjects church presented for contemplation. And the wonderful nutty flavor stayed with me for hours.

So I have decided that I will enjoy coffee, but in an inverted way compared to most of the world. Rather than as a way to crank more productivity out of myself on less sleep, I will reserve it as a pleasure for the Sabbath. Rather than through the Monday morning grind, it will bring me to fullest worship on Sundays.

Maybe I was foolish to avoid coffee for so long, but I think it was exactly in waiting the way I did that I discovered a wise and relatively novel use for it. I like, even love coffee, but it is my servant and not my master.

