---
title: Raw Milk
subblog: food nick
tags: particular foods, identity
---

You can learn valuable things doing an odd job.

In the fall of 2009 I was out of work. I had decided to try something other than teaching high school, to "dust off the old brain" and try to work with the same problem-solving skills that got me into physics to begin with. I'm amazed the transition from there to software happened as quickly and as smoothly as it did. Thanks God! But all the same I was rather lost that fall.

As I looked for a start down a long-term career path, I still needed to make at least some money. So I found a couple of odd jobs. Among them my friend [Jean](http://www.jeanelee.com/) got me a twice-weekly gig at an Amish farmer's stand. Wednesday afternoons at Penn and Saturday mornings at Lancaster and Powelton I would assist Mr. John King with setting up the stand and selling his wares.

It was really my kind of job. I got to talk with people and handle food all day. Being outside was nice, too. It wasn't enough to get by but it was something.

More than the money, the most valuable thing I took away from that job was knowledge of  raw milk. Perhaps my friends have regretted it ever since.

<!-- MORE -->

One of my coworkers introduced me to raw milk, which we sold at the stand.

<pre class="prose">
"Oh man, you gotta try it. It's so good, man."
"But is it safe?"
"Yeah, it's safe. To be able to sell that you've got to take really good care of your animals."
</pre>

So I gave it a shot and I was instantly converted. I had always been a big milk drinker, but true to the 90's I was raised on skim milk, basically the opposite of raw. The first thing I noticed about this milk was it had a different color. There was a hint of gold to its glint. The second thing I noticed was its flavor. I tasted the pasture its cows had fed on, but as it must taste to them rather than how it would taste to me. And the texture! It was so smooth. In comparison pasteurized milk felt chalky in the mouth.

Once I had that first half-gallon of raw milk I knew I would never go back. Unfortunately my friends have found I also would never shut up. If only the good news of Jesus came so readily to my lips.

It's very difficult to have a conversation about raw milk that doesn't focus on the risk of food-borne pathogen, which I'm confident is lower than some other risks we think little of. But to approach it from this angle is really to miss quite a lot.

The first great thing about raw milk is its rawness. I've written [recently](/food/posts/2015/04/30/raw-materials/) about the value of raw materials and how they open up even more opportunities than we are capable of imagining they will at the outset. Raw milk is raw in this sense, too. I don't only lament the lack of raw milk here in Korea because now I don't have tasty milk on hand. If I did have that milk I could make many things that I also might wish for. I'm thinking of ice cream and cheese, things you can get here but which are just not the same or are more expensive when they are good. I'll walk past an ice cream place here that advertises "real milk ice cream" and I'll sneer. What they mean by real milk falls far short of a better standard that I have known.

The result is that after a few months here in Korea I just don't drink very much milk. It goes in smoothies but tasting it on its own makes me too sad to want to drink much. I didn't even think much of serving it when I baked cookies. Many people express indifference to raw milk because they "don't like milk." I wonder if that's actually a circular reason. If I had only ever worn itchy shirts I might decide that I don't like shirts and wouldn't care to wear a cotton one.

The result is that I'm perilously close to becoming "one of those people," the nuts the genteel half of the country can't abide because of their passionate embrace of something so far out of the worldview taught in classrooms from an early age. My stepbrother Jordan is "one of those people" with respect to guns, in that he seriously considers the nature of a state's gun laws before thinking of living there. As I've spent time away from Pennsylvania and its abundant, affordable, accessible raw milk I've realized exactly how important this availability is to me.

I don't think I would want to buy a house somewhere you can't get raw milk. It's that important to me. Perhaps this more than anything draws me back to my dad's origins on a dairy farm.
