---
title: Tea Tip
subblog: food
tags: particular foods
---
I'm trying to have it both ways: a refreshing summer tea that's iced unlike my normal tea but unsweetened unlike normal iced tea.

I love me some sweet tea, but I don't need to be drinking it every day or having simple syrup for it take up space in my fridge (regular sugar might not dissolve in cold tea). Last weekend I hit on a promising alternative.

<!-- MORE -->

I bought a bunch of peppermint at the Clark Park farmer's market for just $1. I crowded added half of this bunch, an ounce or two by weight, stem along with leaves, inside a teapot. On top I sprinkled 3-4 tsp of English Breakfast tea leaves. I boiled 1-1.5L of water and poured it in, right over the mint and the tea. 

After just a few minutes, say just under four, I strained all the brewed tea out into another pitcher. I let it cool to room temperature. When I wanted to drink it I poured it over a good amount of ice.

It was delicious! The English Breakfast was smooth and the mint, by no means overshadowed and in fact the stronger partner, was refreshing. Cooling to room temperature kept the tea from becoming cloudy as some dissolved tea might come out of solution. And I didn't need to add excess refined sucrose.

I'm a little unsure the balance of water temperature and brew time to reach. In general English Breakfast should be brewed with fully boiling water, while peppermint tea would probably do better with water ten or twenty degrees cooler. In addition the black tea might do better with a little longer of a brew. 

Maybe I shouldn't overthink it, though. It worked out fine on Sunday!
