---
title: PB & Yay
subblog: food
tags: particular foods
---

I first published this short essay in September 2007 in my role as opinion blogger for *The Daily Pennsylvanian:*

<!-- MORE -->

<pre class="prose">
How much would you like to spend on lunch?

If Penn Dining is your destination, I’m afraid you’re paying upwards of $10. Oh well – hopefully the money is well spent. 

Perhaps you’re checking out the veritable United Nations on Spruce Street, our army of food trucks. Here you can do a lot better (sorry, freshmen). A delicious afternoon repast is available to you for around $5.  

For the savvy lunchtime consumer unsatisfied with anything but the highest concentration of value, flavor, and nutrition, I have good news. You can enjoy a convenient and fulfilling peanut butter sandwich, complete with beverage, for just about $2.50.

I wouldn’t scoff if I were you. I speak from experience. It is not at all an exaggeration to say that peanut butter got me where I am today. In a Herculean display of devotion, my dad braved six weeks of nothing but peanut butter to pay for my mom’s engagement ring. Throughout grade school, I ate a lunch of peanut butter virtually every day. Even today, I am glad to spurn more sophisticated options in favor of a brown paper bag containing nothing but the letters P, B, and J.

I would like to take a moment to correct the mistaken notion that peanut butter is lacking in nutrition. Many point to its relatively high fat content, about a quarter of your daily allotment per serving. However, peanut butter is over ninety percent peanuts, and peanuts are rich in monounsaturated fat. You know, the kind in olive oil. The good kind.  
Even better, peanut butter is high in protein, making it a great alternative for you plant haters out there. 

But doesn’t peanut butter get boring? Nonsense! The varieties are endless. Peanut butter and strawberry. Peanut butter and raspberry. Peanut butter and fluff. Crunchy. Creamy. Skippy. Jif. Wheat. White. Add chocolate, banana, honey, or granola. With so many options, how could anyone grow tired of such an incredible meal?

A quick tip: peanut butter sandwiches are best made symmetrically. It should be spread on both slices of bread. Do this, and your jam and bread will work out their differences peaceably within your stomach, rather than create a soggy mess within your lunch bag.

Don’t let 1950’s-style Wonder Bread specials ruin your idea of what really can be a satisfying lunch option. Give peanut butter a try. It couldn’t be any worse than the alternative.
</pre>

